Users App - Extensions and Updates

Date: 01.09.2024

1. Overview

This document provides a summary of the recent extensions and updates implemented in the Users App.

2. New Features and Enhancements

a. Users List

API Integration: Added functionality to fetch user data from the ReqRes API and display it in a list format.
Local Storage: Implemented Room database to save user data locally for offline access and performance improvements.
Initialization Check: Added a boolean flag in Shared Preferences to ensure the API is called only once during the initial launch.

b. User Details

Detailed View: Created a detailed view screen to display and manage individual user information.
Edit and Delete: Enabled functionalities to edit or delete user information from the detailed view screen.

c. Add a User

User Creation: Added a new user through a dedicated screen accessible via a floating action button on the Users List screen.
Validation: Incorporated validation to prevent the addition of users with existing email addresses.

d. Delete User

User Removal: Enabled user removal from the list using a delete icon button and through the detailed view screen.
Deletion Options: Provided a contextual menu in the detailed view for user deletion.

e. Update User

Edit Functionality: Added the ability to update user details, including changing their avatar.
Email Validation: Prevented updating the email to an address already in use by another user.

3. Technical Specifications

Programming Language: Java
Architecture: MVVM
Networking Library: Retrofit
Database Library: Room

4. Dependencies - Libraries Used

Retrofit: For network operations and API integration.

'com.squareup.retrofit2:retrofit:2.11.0'
'com.squareup.retrofit2:converter-gson:2.11.0'

Room Database: For local storage of user data.

'androidx.room:room-runtime:2.5.0'
'annotationProcessor "androidx.room:room-compiler:2.6.1"'

Picasso: For image loading and caching.

'com.squareup.picasso:picasso:2.8'

Material Design: For UI components and design elements.

'com.google.android.material:material:1.11.0'

Paging: For pagination.

'androidx.paging:paging-runtime:3.1.1'

5. Additional Features

Pagination: Implemented pagination in RecyclerView and Room database to handle large datasets efficiently.
Error Handling: Added snackbar messages for error handling related to API requests and input validation.
Splash Screen: Introduced a splash screen for a better user experience during app startup.
Transition Animations: Added transition animations between activities and animated buttons and operations, like deletion.